Test Plans (#639)
italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs: docs/en/test-plans.rst

All test cases are derived from normative rules defined in the above specifications, with no assumptions or extensions.

.. note::

  Please note that the test plans matrix may be subject to future changes.

Structure of the Test Matrix
-----------------------------

Each test case is identified by a unique test ID (e.g., WS-001) and categorized using the functional domains defined below. Other category identifiers can be used as well.

- **Discovery**
- **Security**
- **Authorization**
- **Authentication**
- **User Interaction**
- **User Notification**
- **Credential Issuance**
- **Proof of Possession**
- **Attestation Evaluation**
- **Credential Presentation**
- **Credential Status**
- **Backup & Restore**

For each test case, the table specifies:

- **Test Case**: a unique identifier.
- **Category**: the functional area covered by the test.
- **Description**: the requirement being tested, always based on a normative MUST from the specification.

> - **Expected Result**: the expected outcome when the Wallet is implemented correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Expected Result**: the expected outcome when the solution is implemented correctly.
```

     - Ensure COSE/JOSE are not substituted across different contexts.
     - COSE/JOSE must be validated for context-specific use.
   * - ATT-013
     - Issued At Validation
     - Verify that the `issued at` parameter is set to the current time, allowing a grace period not exceeding 120 seconds.
     - The `issued at` value must be within 120 seconds of the current time.
   * - ATT-014
     - Expiration Validation
     - Ensure the `expiration` time is greater than the `issued at` time.
     - The `expiration` time must be later than the `issued at` time.
   * - ATT-015
     - Data model validation
     - Ensure JOSE/COSE type matches with the defined data model.
     - The parameters or claims, their values and the schema used to represent them are compliant with the data model.

Trust Evaluation Test Matrix
-----------------------------

This section provides the common set of test cases for Wallet Solutions, Relying Parties and Credential Issuers.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 10 15 40 35
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Test Case
     - Category
     - Description
     - Expected Result
   * - ALL-001
     - Security
     - Obtaining Trust Anchors public cryptographic materials

>      - Entities obtains the list of Trust Anchors or Certificate Authorities and their public cryptographic key materials, periodically ensuring that these are not expired, revoked or updated. Infrastructure of Trust provides these information through web endpoints and other out of band mechanisms, to facilitate comparison of the provided information to all the entities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Entities obtain the list of Trust Anchors or Certificate Authorities and their public cryptographic key materials, periodically ensuring that these are not expired, revoked or updated. Infrastructure of Trust provides these information through web endpoints and other out of band mechanisms, to facilitate comparison of the provided information to all the entities.
```

   * - ALL-002
     - Security
     - Compliance self evaluation
     - Entities periodically evaluate their compliance and presence within the federation, checking the trust chain about themselves as still valid, not revoked and compliant with the tecnhical specification. Entities apply the policies, checking that their current configuration is valid with the active policies about them within the federation. Trust chain, evaluated and stored in mutiple formats to facilitate interoperability in trust discovery with other entities, are stored by entities and used on occurrence during the data exchange flows. Trust chain about entities are fetched or discovered using the entitie's issued assertions.
   * - ALL-003
     - Discovery
     - Publication of information about itself

>      - Entities signs and publish all the information about them, containing all the protocol metadata, cryptographic material, trust marks, using the well-known endpoint defined in this specification, making these information publicly discoverable by other entities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Entities sign and publish all the information about them, containing all the protocol metadata, cryptographic material, trust marks, using the well-known endpoint defined in this specification, making these information publicly discoverable by other entities.
```

   * - ALL-004
     - Security
     - Publication of the historical key registry

>      - Entities signs and publish all the information about the unused or revoked cryptographic material using well known endpoints defined in this specification, making these information publicly discoverable by other entities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Entities sign and publish all the information about the unused or revoked cryptographic material using well known endpoints defined in this specification, making these information publicly discoverable by other entities.
```

   * - ALL-005
     - Security
     - Evaluation of compliance with entities before exchanging data about the User

>      - Entities evaluates trust and compliance with other entities before any information related to a natural or legal person might be exchanged. Bogus configurations don't allow data exchanges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Entities evaluate trust and compliance with other entities before any information related to a natural or legal person might be exchanged. Bogus configurations don't allow data exchanges.
```

   * - ALL-006
     - Security
     - Evaluation of proof of possession during the use of a signed assertion in according to the configured usage ownership confirmation method. 

>      - Entities evaluates the confirmation method and apply its protocol to consider valid the signed statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Entities evaluate the confirmation method and apply its protocol to consider valid the signed statement.
```

   * - ALL-007
     - Security
     - Supported cryptography algorithms
     - Entities evaluates cryptography using in compliance of the allowed algorithms.
   * - ALL-008
     - Security
     - Replay attacks

>      - Signed statements using unique identifiers are stored untill their expiration time and checked againts any replay of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Evaluation of proof of possession during the use of a signed assertion in according to the configured usage ownership confirmation method. 
     - Entities evaluate the confirmation method and apply its protocol to consider valid the signed statement.
   * - ALL-007
     - Security
     - Supported cryptography algorithms
     - Entities evaluate cryptography using in compliance of the allowed algorithms.
   * - ALL-008
     - Security
     - Replay attacks
     - Signed statements using unique identifiers are stored until their expiration time and checked against any replay of them.
```

Wallet Solution Test Matrix
-----------------------------

> This section provides the set of test cases for verifying conformance of a Wallet Solution implementations to the technical rules defined in the IT-Wallet ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section provides the set of test cases for verifying conformance of a Wallet Solution implementation to the technical rules defined in the IT-Wallet ecosystem.
```

- Wallet Solution
- Wallet Instance Revocation
- Wallet Attestation Issuance
- Backup and Restore

.. list-table::
   :widths: 10 15 40 35
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Test Case
     - Category
     - Description
     - Expected Result
   * - WS-001
     - Wallet Initialization
     - The Wallet Solution MUST ensure that each Wallet Instance is generated according to the specifications and includes a unique identifier, and cryptographic keys bound to a secure element.
     - A compliant Wallet Instance is generated with correct identifiers and secure bindings.
   * - WS-002
     - User Interaction
     - The Wallet Solution MUST request and obtain explicit User Consent during Wallet Instance initialization.
     - The Wallet Instance is activated only after obtaining verifiable User Consent.
   * - WS-003
     - Security
     - The Wallet Solution MUST store private keys within a Secure Hardware Element or equivalent secure storage.
     - All private key materials are inaccessible from the operating system or any application outside the Wallet Solution.
   * - WS-004
     - Attestation

>      - The Wallet MUST be capable of generating and presenting a Wallet Attestation when required by Verifiers or Issuers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - The Wallet MUST be capable of generating and presenting a Wallet Attestation when required by Relying Parties or Issuers.
```

     - Valid, verifiable Attestations are generated including integrity and origin proofs.
   * - WS-005
     - Attestation
     - The Wallet MUST support processing Wallet Attestation Requests and generating appropriate responses in compliance with eIDAS.
     - The Wallet correctly interprets and fulfills attestation requests including subject data and cryptographic signatures.
   * - WS-006
     - Remote Credential Presentation

>      - The Wallet Solution MUST implement the both the proximity and remote presentation flow, ensuring Verifiable Credential selection, integrity, and User interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - The Wallet Solution MUST implement both the proximity and remote presentation flow, ensuring Verifiable Credential selection, integrity, and User interaction.
```

   * - PPR-003
     - Communication
     - Test the transmission of mdoc request over BLE.
     - mdoc request is transmitted securely over BLE.

   * - PPR-004
     - User Authentication
     - Validate user authentication via WSCA.
     - User is authenticated successfully using WSCA.

   * - PPR-005
     - Attribute Consent
     - Check user consent for attribute release.
     - User consents to release requested attributes.

   * - PPR-006
     - Data Retrieval
     - Test retrieval of mdoc Digital Credentials.
     - mdoc Digital Credentials are retrieved successfully.

   * - PPR-007
     - Session Termination
     - Verify session termination after data exchange.
     - Session is terminated and keys are destroyed.

   * - PPR-008
     - Error Handling
     - Test handling of invalid session keys.
     - Appropriate error message is displayed for invalid keys.

   * - PPR-009
     - BLE Connection
     - Test BLE connection stability during data exchange.
     - BLE connection remains stable throughout the exchange.

   * - PPR-010
     - Document Verification
     - Verify the integrity of received documents.
     - Documents are verified and integrity is confirmed.

>    * - TC-010
>      - Document Verification
>      - Verify the integrity of received documents.
>      - Documents are verified and integrity is confirmed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

   * - ALL-003
     - Discovery
     - Publication of information about itself
     - Entities signs and publish all the information about them, containing all the protocol metadata, cryptographic material, trust marks, using the well-known endpoint defined in this specification, making these information publicly discoverable by other entities.
   * - ALL-004
     - Security
     - Publication of the historical key registry
     - Entities signs and publish all the information about the unused or revoked cryptographic material using well known endpoints defined in this specification, making these information publicly discoverable by other entities.
   * - ALL-005
     - Security
     - Evaluation of compliance with entities before exchanging data about the User

>      - Entities evaluates trust and compliance with other entities before any information related to a citizen might be exchanged. Bogus configurations don't allow data exchanges.

Author: ```suggestion
     - Entities evaluates trust and compliance with other entities before any information related to a natural or legal person might be exchanged. Bogus configurations don't allow data exchanges.
```

   * - ALL-006
     - Security

>      - Evaluation of proof of possession during the use of a signed assertion including any usage ownership confirmation method. 

Author: ```suggestion
     - Evaluation of proof of possession during the use of a signed assertion in according to the configured usage ownership confirmation method. 
```

- PID/EAA Issuance

.. list-table::
   :widths: 10 15 40 35
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Test Case
     - Category
     - Description
     - Expected Result
   * - ISS-001
     - Setup
     - Validate Wallet Instance Setup
     - Wallet Instance is set up with a valid Wallet Attestation. Ensure the public key is valid and correctly bound to a secure element.
   * - ISS-002
     - Discovery
     - PID/(Q)EAA Provider Discovery
     - Wallet Instance successfully discovers trusted Digital Credential Issuers using the Credential Catalogue and their configuration compliance and policies with Federation API.
   * - ISS-003
     - Metadata
     - PID/(Q)EAA Provider Metadata Retrieval
     - Wallet Instance retrieves and validates PID/(Q)EAA Provider metadata. Metadata includes PID formats, supported algorithms, and interoperability parameters.
   * - ISS-004
     - Authorization, Authentication
     - PID/(Q)EAA Request using Authorization Code Flow
     - Wallet Instance successfully requests PID/(Q)EAA using Authorization Code Flow. Validate PKCE use with a code verifier of 43-128 characters.
   * - ISS-005
     - Authentication
     - User Authentication with PID Provider

>      - User is authenticated with LoA 3 (High) by the PID Provider. Validate the use of national digital identity schemes and ensure User consent is obtained.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - User is authenticated with LoA 3 (High) by the PID Provider. Validate the use of the digital identity scheme CieID and ensure that User consent is obtained.
```

   * - ISS-052
     - Security
     - Validate Credential Expiry in Re-Issuance
     - Ensure the newly issued Credential has the same expiry date as the previous one.
   * - ISS-053
     - Security
     - Validate User Authentication in Re-Issuance
     - Ensure User authentication is required for Re-Issuance after Credential expiration.
   * - ISS-054
     - Security
     - Validate Deferred Endpoint Parameters
     - Ensure the Deferred Endpoint parameters are used correctly and the Credential is issued after the specified lead time.
   * - ISS-055
     - Security
     - Validate Deferred Credential Request
     - Ensure the Deferred Credential Request is sent correctly and the Credential is issued.
   * - ISS-056
     - Security
     - Validate Deferred Credential Response
     - Ensure the Deferred Credential Response contains all mandatory parameters and values are validated.
   * - ISS-057
     - Security
     - Validate Notification Endpoint Parameters
     - Ensure the Notification Endpoint parameters are used correctly and the event is reported.
   * - ISS-058
     - Security
     - Validate Notification Endpoint Response

>      - Ensure the Notification Endpoint Response is received with the correct status code.

Reviewer 2: It seems equal to ISS-43

Author: removed, thx

     - Ensure errors in the Credential Offer Oversight process are handled correctly and reported.
   * - ISS-108
     - Error Handling
     - Validate Error Handling in Credential Offer Supervision
     - Ensure errors in the Credential Offer Supervision process are handled correctly and reported.
   * - ISS-109
     - Error Handling
     - Validate Error Handling in Credential Offer Monitoring
     - Ensure errors in the Credential Offer Monitoring process are handled correctly and reported.
   * - ISS-110
     - Error Handling
     - Validate Error Handling in Credential Offer Evaluation
     - Ensure errors in the Credential Offer Evaluation process are handled correctly and reported.
   * - ISS-111
     - Error Handling
     - Validate Error Handling in Credential Offer Assessment
     - Ensure errors in the Credential Offer Assessment process are handled correctly and reported.

Credential Presentation Test Matrix
------------------------------------

This section provides the set of test cases for verifying conformance of a Credential Verifiers implementations to the technical rules defined in the IT-Wallet ecosystem.

> Remote Credential Presetation Test Matrix

Author: ```suggestion
Remote Credential Presentation Test Matrix
```
